Sometimes I like just to stand
on the top of the first dune,
looking at
people’s reaction.
People arrive
and...
Wow.
The first time that
I came here,
I was around
12 years old.
It was shocking.
It was a feeling like
to be in another planet.
It looks like a desert,
but Lençóis Maranhenses gets more rain
than Scotland or London, which is
around 1600 millimeters [63 inches] a year.
So it’s not a desert—
it’s something else.
Lençóis Maranhenses,
on the northeast coast of Brazil,
sits at the intersection of three biomes—
a rare overlap that supercharges biodiversity.
Here, a field of dunes spreads across
350 square miles,
and every year these mountains of sand
migrate up to 80 feet.
Then during the rainy season,
thousands of lagoons appear, many big enough to swim in.
So what makes this surreal
environment possible?
And why, even after 2 million years in existence,
does it still feel so mysterious?
Lençóis Maranhenses is the biggest
field of dunes in South America.
Between these dunes,
during the rainy season
the water level rises
and they form lagoons.
You can never see Lençóis Maranhenses twice
because everything is changing all the time.
Strong movements
of sand and water
changing the shapes and
the compositions of the lagoons.
I spent
almost like a year
camping and living
in tents around the park
and surveying amphibians
and reptiles.
This opportunity changed
my view of life
and helped to forge
the biologist that I am today.
Some visitors arrive there
and wonder why
the water
just doesn’t sink.
Underneath the field of dunes,
there is a rock which traps water
so it doesn't keep
sinking forever.
So let’s imagine
there is a bathtub.
When it rains,
the water level starts to rise.
And then you can see the water
in the holes in between the dunes,
so you can see
the lagoons formed.
And then in the dry season,
the water evaporates.
The water level
starts to go down again
until it gets here.
The water is still there.
People cannot see it,
but it is still there.
If this year, a lagoon is in a certain place
in the next year, it will move.
Because where the lagoon is formed,
the dunes will bury that lagoon.
And next year, a new lagoon
will emerge further ahead.
Here, an unusually large tide range
creates a wide beach at low tide.
Strong winds lift the fine sand
and blow it inland to build new dune ridges.
The winds come mainly
from the same direction.
The sand gets dry
and then it can be carried by this strong wind.
They measured
the size of the grains.
It’s so little.
The sand is so soft,
it’s so loose
that it flows down the hill
like water.
It's beautiful.
The wind is constantly redrawing paths,
so locals follow wind and ridgelines, not maps.
I was born and raised here,
in Ponta do Mangue.
My parents were born here, my
grandparents were born here
and we’ve been living here
this whole time.
Sometimes we go out in the morning,
and it’s windy, the dune is flat.
When we return later in the day,
the dune has a different shape.
You have to be very careful,
sometimes we get lost.
The wind erases
all the car tracks.
Out of nowhere, it creates a dune
in the middle of another.
Last week, we took a wrong turn
and we kept going.
Later we realized that
we were in the wrong path.
Then we came back again,
so we could continue.
They call it
the desert that breathes
because of the dunes,
the movement of the dunes.
Everything is destroyed
and rebuilt every single year.
In the region of Lençóis
everything is mixed.
There are some animals
that occur just there.
And salt marshes,
very far from the ocean,
different from almost
all the others that exist in the world
that usually occur very close to the beach
because it needs this salt.
We have a turtle,
which is Pininga.
It’s a water tiger turtle.
It's an endemic species.
And the park plays
an important role for its conservation,
because it doesn’t exist
anywhere else.
And this animal is known to rest,
digging underneath the dunes.
So it reduces its metabolism,
waiting for the next rainy season.
The fish have a life cycle
shorter than one year.
They leave the eggs
that are resistant to this dryness.
And when the water comes,
everything comes to life again.
We are going to
a world of extremes.
Lençóis,
it’s a micro-laboratory;
as we increase our knowledge,
we might find ideas
that may be useful
on the perspective
of a climactic emergency.
Since we live near the dunes,
sometimes we have to move.
My father used to live among
those dunes over there.
The dune kept growing.
In our case, in about three, four years,
I think we’ll have to move,
because the dunes are getting closer
and throwing sand.
When the lagoons dry up
we take the fish from the ponds and put them
in the ones that have more water
so they can survive a little longer, otherwise,
they will die of drought.
When I close my eyes
and I think about Lençóis Maranhenses,
the first thing that comes to my mind
is a dragonfly, flying over a lagoon…
There are white flowers,
their roots dancing in the water.
It’s a place that can really
change people’s mind and soul and heart.
And they say,
“for the first time I’m breathing.”
Very special place.
Sorry.
When I pass away,
I’d like them to burn me and put my ashes
moving from lakes to lakes.
Moving with the wind,
with the water.
To be part of it,
forever.